StratusLab Collaboration
========================

The StratusLab Collaboration aims to provide a complete, open-source
cloud distribution that allows resource centers to deploy their own
public or private "Infrastructure as a Service" (IaaS) cloud
infrastructure.

The collaboration's motto is "Darn Simple Cloud". We aim to provide a
cloud solution that is both simple to install and simple to use. Where
possible, we build on existing software and technologies to minimize and
to simplify our own code base.

At the same time, we strongly believe in providing high quality, well
tested code; we use agile software development processes and tools to
achieve this.

History
-------

StratusLab started as an informal, academic collaboration between
several partners involved in the EGEE series of grid projects in 2008.
The initial aim of this collaboration was to investigate if the new
cloud technologies (primarily Amazon Web Services) could be used as a
platform for running grid services. The collaboration concluded that is
was indeed possible and further, was convinced that cloud technologies
would be an important platform for scientific computing.

The collaboration subsequently grew into a more formal collaboration
that proposed a European-level project to build an open-source cloud
distribution suitable for running grid services. This proposal was
accepted and StratusLab, as a project co-funded by the European
Commission, ran from June 2010 to May 2012. During this period, the
foundations of the current StratusLab cloud distribution were built.

The StratusLab collaboration continues to maintain and to develop
further this cloud distribution as an open collaboration of institutes
and individuals. The four principal institutes currently participating
are CNRS (France), SixSq (Switzerland), GRNET (Greece), and Trinity
College Dublin (Ireland).

Joining the Collaboration
-------------------------

The collaboration welcomes new collaborators, both institutions and
individuals. All it takes is a willingness to participate constructively
in the collaboration and to provide contributions consistent with the
licenses used by the collaboration. Contact us at contact@stratuslab.eu
to become a member.

Communication
-------------

The collaboration coordinates its activities primarily through a common
mailing list: stratuslab-devel@googlegroups.com. Developers are expected
to solicit feedback and to announce significant changes on that list.
There is also a weekly teleconference on Thursdays at 11:30 (Paris) to
allow more interactive discussion of progress and problems.
