
# SSH Client

Nearly always, virtual machine instances are accessed remotely via an
SSH (secure shell) session.  This requires that the user has an SSH
client installed and has generated an SSH key pair.  


## Linux Operating Systems

### Client Installation

An SSH client, usually [OpenSSH](www.openssh.org), comes as a standard
part of all Linux operating systems.  It is normally installed by
default, but can be installed via the distribution's package
management system if necessary.

### Creating an SSH Key Pair

To use the client to connect to virtual machine instances, the user
must have an SSH key pair consisting of a "public" key and a "private"
key.  These keys are usually located in the `~/.ssh/` directory and
have names like `id_rsa` (private) and `id_rsa.pub` (public).

You can generate them with the following command

    $ ssh-keygen

The default values are appropriate in most cases, but you should
provide a passphrase and not leave it empty.

Verify the generated key pair permissions. The `id_rsa` should have
permissions 0600 (read/write access for owner only) and the
`id_rsa.pub` should have permissions 0644 (read access for all; write
access for owner).

**Be sure to remember the passphrase that you have used!**  This
passphrase can (and usually is) different from the password for the
user's account.

### SSH Agent

SSH agents allow users to provide the passphrase once per session,
caching the passphrase and providing it automatically after the first
request.  This makes use of SSH more convenient when multiple
connections are being made to a virtual machine.

Some operating systems start an SSH agent automatically when a user
logs in.  If this is the case, be sure that the agent uses the correct
key and the correct password for that key.

You can check if an SSH agent is running by looking at the
`SSH_AGENT_PID` variable.

    $ printenv SSH_AGENT_PID

If this isn't empty, then the agent is running.  You can add your key
to the agent with the command:

    $ ssh-add

Providing the passphrases for your keys when prompted for them.  See
the manpages for `ssh-agent` and `ssh-add` for more information.

## Mac OS X

### Client Installation

The SSH client is a standard part of Mac OS X.  No installation is
necessary. 

### Generating an SSH Key Pair

The commands and procedure are the same as for the Linux operating
systems.  Follow the instructions there. 

### SSH Agent

An SSH agent is started automatically when logging into the machine.
It will automatically ask for your passphrase the first time and then
remember it for all future sessions. 

## Windows

### Client Installation

Windows does not ship with an SSH client, so you must install one.
Although there are some other solutions (especially for recent
versions of Windows), most people install and use
[PuTTY](http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/).  Binaries
and installation instructions can be found on that site.

It is recommended to install the full PuTTY distribution, but at a
minimum the putty and puttygen executables need to be available. 

### Generating an SSH Key Pair

Unfortunately, the SSH key pairs generated by PuTTY are **not**
compatible with those used by OpenSSH.  Consequently, to log into
virtual machine instances, you **must**:

 * Generate an SSH key pair on a Linux or Unix system and
 * Import those keys into PuTTY. 

To generate an SSH key pair on a Linux or Unix system, follow the
above instructions.

To import your id_rsa file to PuTTY:

1. Start PuTTYGen,
2. Click "Load", and browse to your `id_rsa` file (the private key),
3. Click "Save private key". Your private key will be saved in the
   format required by PuTTY.

To log in your virtual machine using PuTTY:

1. Start PuTTY,
2. In the "session" category provide the hostname or IP address
3. In Connection/SSH/Auth category, in "Private key for
   authentication" field, browse to your private key.
4. Open

More information on how to "Connecting to Linux/UNIX Instances from
Windows Using PuTTY" can be found in the [Amazon
documentation](http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/putty.html).

### SSH Agent

PuTTY supports the SSH agent functionality through the Pageant executable.
