
# Marketplace

Building new virtual machine appliances can be a tedious and
time-consuming task.  Your first instinct should be to first look in
the Marketplace to see if someone else has done the work for you!

## Appliance Registry

The [StratusLab Marketplace](https://marketplace.stratuslab.eu/)
provides a registry for available, public virtual machine appliances.
These are created by the people within the community as well as by
StratusLab developers to help people get started using the cloud
quickly.

Each appliance entry contains the basic information along with a link
to see more detailed information.  **The machine identifier is the
most important piece of information.** Just providing it to the
`stratus-run-instance` command is enough to launch an instance of that
appliance.

## Base Appliances

The StratusLab developers provide "base" appliances for ttylinux,
CentOS (a RedHat Enterprise Linux derivative), Ubuntu, Debian, and
OpenSuSE.  These are minimal, but functional, installations of these
operating systems.  They can be used directly or customized to create
personalized machines.  These can be found by typing
"images@stratuslab.eu" for the endorser in the "Filter" boxes on the
right side of the Marketplace page.  (See the screenshot.)

![StratusLab Base Appliances](images/baseimages-screenshot.png)

You can also use the filters, for example on the operating system, to
further refine the list.

## Customized Appliances

Although not covered in this tutorial, you can also create and
register your own appliances to share with others.  For example, the
European project IGE has prepared appliances for testing Globus
services and for running their tutorials with the services.  IBCP in
Lyon has created appliances with numerous bioinformatics applications
already installed.

Search the Marketplace to find all of the appliances endorsed by
StratusLab.  Also search for other appliances that might be
interesting to you. 

